122: polishing contributing doc (#125)
openpharma/mmrm: .github/CONTRIBUTING.Rmd

---
output: github_document
---
<!-- markdownlint-disable-file -->
<!-- CONTRIBUTING.md needs to be generated from CONTRIBUTING.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Contributing

Thank you for your interest in contributing to this repo!

> Your contribution is highly valued, and please go through this document to help you contribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your contribution is highly valued. Please go through this document for guidance on how to contribute.
```

## Programming conventions

> Please follow the programming conventions to ensure a consistent program style across the package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please follow the programming conventions to ensure a consistent programming style across the package.
```

Generally we follow the [tidyverse style guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/).

> Some specific conventions that deviate from this are explained here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some specific conventions that deviate from this are explained below.
```

### Functions

> 1. Function names should be explicit and clear, separated by underscore (`snake_case`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Function names should be explicit and clear. Words should be separated by underscore (`snake_case`).
```

2. Functions starting with `h_` are helper functions and they should not be exported.
3. Functions should be well documented using `roxygen2` (even when they are not exported).
4. Functions must be unit tested (even when they are not exported).

### Comments

- Comments should always follow sentence style.
- Comments should be as minimal as possible: Generally the code and variable names
  should be clear enough to not need any comments. Only use them when needed and
  explain the "Why" and not the "What".

## Github conventions

When using github to collaborate, the following conventions are needed:

1. Github issues is for issues, feature requests, bugs. Before creating a issue, please make sure this issue has not been reported yet.
   - If you are going to work on this issue, please assign yourself.
2. Please create a branch in the `mmrm` repository, instead of creating forks, unless you are not yet a team member.

>    - The name of a branch should be like `<issue_id>_<short_discription>`. Use an underscore to separate the description.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Branches should be associated with a GitHub issue and linked to an issue id. 
   - The name of a branch should be of the form: `<issue_id>_<short_discription>`.
```
just to introduce that branches should be linked to issues.

   - Functions are well documented.
   - Functions have corresponding unit tests.
   - Changes pass all the github action checks.
   - The checklist in the corresponding issue is completed.
5. Address all the comments you receive.
   - at least one approval is needed to merge.

## Contribution tips

### Development environment Set-up

The development this `mmrm` package is based on the latest R version and C++ compilers.
The package dependencies are the most recent versions from CRAN.
We recommend that your working environment is set up in the same way.
Additionally, there are some tools we recommend you to install:

1. [`RTools`](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/rtools42/rtools.html) if you work on a Windows operating system. Alternatively you can use [`docker`](https://www.docker.com/) to separate the operating system and the development system.
2. [`GitKraken`](https://www.gitkraken.com/) is a very useful user interface for git including visualization of git commit graphs, file history, etc.
3. [`lintr`](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/package_structure.html#lintr) will allow you to perform static code analysis.

> 4. [`pre-commit`](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/package_structure.html#pre-commit-config.yaml) is a Python module that allow you to identify issues before you commit locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. [`pre-commit`](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/package_structure.html#pre-commit-config.yaml) is a Python module that allows you to identify issues before you commit locally.
```

| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `SPx`              | `SP` (story points) indicate complexity, and the larger the subsequent number, the more time consuming the issue is expected to be |
| `priority`         | Issues with this label should be completed with higher priority                                                                    |
| `good first issue` | Good choices for new team members                                                                                                  |
| `blocked`          | Blocked by other issues                                                                                                            |
| `bug`              | Something isn't working                                                                                                            |
| `devops`           | Development and Operation                                                                                                          |

> | `discussion`       | Disccusion needed                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `discussion`       | Discussion needed                                                                                                                  |
```

| `help wanted`      | Extra attention is needed                                                                                                          |
| `invalid`          | This doesn't seem right                                                                                                            |
| `question`         | Further information needed                                                                                                         |

Please choose an issue based on your interest, issue complexity, and priority.

### Add new unit tests

To add a new unit test, you need to first identify the test scope.
Does the test fit in the scope of existing tests?
If so, please modify the existing test files under `tests/testthat/` folder or `src/` folder, depending on whether the code to be tested is R or C++.
Otherwise please create a new test file, with a name prefix of "test-".

In each test case, use the following structure:

```{r eval=FALSE}
test_that("<function_name> do something as explained", {
  # test body

>   expect_identical(1, 1)

Reviewer: funnily enough, I've provided boilerplate like this to contributors and eventually found `expect_identical(1,1)` in their eventual first PR.

Author: thanks, I made it even more obvious now :-)

>   # test body
>   expect_identical(1, 1)

Author: ```suggestion
  result <- <function_name>(input)
  expected <- <hardcoded result>
  expect_identical(result, expected)
```

})
```

The purpose of the test should be clearly stated first.

In the test body part, conduct the tests, e.g. use `expect_identical` to check consistency, `expect_error` to catch error messages, etc.
The test body should not follow the same implementation logic as the package did, otherwise we may miss mistakes in implementation.

### Add integration tests

Integration tests compare the results of SAS and R and assures the quality of our code.
To add an integration test, you need to do the following:

> 1. Use SAS to run an appropriate mmrm models with `proc mixed`, using `fev_data`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use SAS to run an appropriate mmrm model with `proc mixed`, using `fev_data`.
```

> 2. Save the results in `txt` format in the `design/SAS/` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Save the results in `.txt` format in the `design/SAS/` folder.
```

   1. `Template` is a special function that works with generic argument type. We could imagine a single function that could work on arguments of arbitrary type, and `template` functions make this possible through separation of function logic from the argument declaration. In this way we can use `template` functions and avoid the need to replicate the whole code for each type.

With these points in mind, you are about ready to go.

### Get started with TMB

In `mmrm` we are not including any latent variables and so the Laplace approximation aspect of `TMB` is not used. We only use the automatic differentiation part of `TMB`. For detailed documentation of `TMB`, visit the [TMB reference](https://kaskr.github.io/adcomp/Introduction.html).

One important feature of `TMB` are the R style matrix/array calculations. This is important because we mainly use this part to conduct our calculations. See [matrix_arrays.cpp](https://kaskr.github.io/adcomp/matrix_arrays_8cpp-example.html) for examples.

### Add a new covariance structure

To add a new covariance structure, you need to do the following:

> 1. Understand the covariance structure and add appropriate documentation in [covariance structure](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/covariance.html) and you can create a draft pull request to invite discussion from other team members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Understand the covariance structure and add appropriate documentation in [covariance structure](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/main/articles/covariance.html). Create a draft pull request to invite discussion from other team members.
```

| `enhancement`      | New feature or request                                                                                                             |
| `help wanted`      | Extra attention is needed                                                                                                          |
| `invalid`          | This doesn't seem right                                                                                                            |
| `question`         | Further information needed                                                                                                         |

Please choose an issue based on your interest, issue complexity, and priority.

### Add new unit tests

To add a new unit test, you need to first identify the test scope.
Does the test fit in the scope of existing tests?
If so, please modify the existing test files under `tests/testthat/` folder or `src/` folder, depending on whether the code to be tested is R or C++.
Otherwise please create a new test file, with a name prefix of "test-".

In each test case, use the following structure:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

# nolint start 
```

```{r eval=FALSE}
test_that("<function_name> do something as explained", {
  result <- <function_name>(input)
  expected <- <hardcoded result>
  expect_identical(result, expected)
})
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

# nolint end
```
